---
title: "Framework"
date: 2019-11-27T09:40:54-08:00
---

# Tech Worker's Voting Framework v2019.12

We have a general voting framework for ballot props which works most of the
time. This framework was developed over several elections by several people,
and it is now fairly stable:

* Taxation <small>\[[#taxation](#taxation)\]</small>

    * Generally prefer to vote for new taxes, preferably without a set-aside
      <small>\[[taxation.new-taxes](#taxation.new-taxes)\]</small>
    * Vote for things that price externalities
      <small>\[[taxation.externalities](#taxation.externalities)\]</small>
    * Generally vote against budget set-asides, which limit the ability of
      representatives to budget effectively
      <small>\[[taxation.set-asides](#taxation.set-asides)\]</small>
    * Vote to liberate funds from budget set-asides, to be useful for other
      purposes
      <small>\[[taxation.liberate-set-asides](#taxation.liberate-set-asides)\]</small>
    * Vote to fund infrastructure
      <small>\[[taxation.infrastructure](#taxation.infrastructure)\]</small>

* Representation <small>\[[#representation](#representation)\]</small>

    * Vote for groups that don’t have a strong lobby (youth, disabled, homeless,
      low-income people, the environment)
      <small>\[[representation.no-lobby](#representation.no-lobby)\]</small>
    * Vote against things which infringe upon rights of the people
      <small>\[[representation.rights](#representation.rights)\]</small>

* Values <small>\[[#values](#values)\]</small>

    * Vote for social policy change in ways that agree with my values
      <small>\[[values.social-policy](#values.social-policy)\]</small>

* Good Government <small>\[[#good-government](#good-government)\]</small>

    * Vote for things which decrease needless or unhelpful bureaucracy
      <small>\[[good-government.bureaucracy](#good-government.bureaucracy)\]</small>
    * Vote for things which promote good government
      <small>\[[good-government.promote](#good-government.promote)\]</small>

Don’t just vote NO on every ballot initiative. California’s broken tax system
requires that way too many things go to the ballot because the legislature
doesn’t have the constitutional authority to pass certain taxes and other laws.
Voting NO for everything based on a principle of “we shouldn’t have to vote on
so much” ensures the state is poorly run. My long term strategy with much of my
political activism is to undo these rules and to bring California back to full
representative democracy where ballot initiatives are rare.

# Details

## Taxation <small>\[<a id="taxation" href="#taxation">taxation</a>\]</small>

### Prefer to vote for new taxes, preferably without a set-aside <small>\[<a id="taxation.new-taxes" href="#taxation.new-taxes">taxation.new-taxes</a>\]</small>


Due to Prop 13, Californians must vote on all new taxes. This was part of the
“taxpayer revolt” led by Howard Jarvis in the 1970s. It was designed to limit
new taxes by forcing all new taxes to go to a popular vote. The analysis of
Prop 13 at the time was telling: it predicted massive shortfalls in public
funding for schools and local governments. Indeed, this prediction came true.
It’s one of the reasons that the University of California system is no longer
free, and why our primary education system is so bad.

We prefer to vote for new taxes because in a healthier democracy these taxes
would be imposed by the legislature. By the time the tax makes it to the
ballot, it already has support from lawmakers and we should respect that
process by having a strong bias in favor of the new taxes.

When we say “preferably without a set-aside,” we mean that we prefer new taxes
to go to the general fund. Public money in the general fund can be appropriated
during the regular budgeting process and can thus be directed towards whatever
is pressing. Budget set-asides, in contrast, are reserved for the particular
cause and cannot be used if the city experiences a budget shortfall. During the
next recession, for example, we will be forced to spend tax money on trees and
arts subsidies instead of school children and infrastructure.

### Vote for things that price externalities <small>\[<a id="taxation.externalities" href="#taxation.externalities">taxation.externalities</a>\]</small>

Avoid the tragedy of the commons: put a price on carbon emissions, packaging
waste, miles driven, etc. Anything that has a diffuse negative impact that
nobody pays for must be priced by a government-mandated market.

### Generally vote against budget set-asides <small>\[<a id="taxation.no-set-asides" href="#taxation.no-set-asides">taxation.no-set-asides</a>\]</small>

Closely related to [taxation.new-taxes](#taxation.new-taxes), but this doesn’t
implement any new taxes. There’s literally no reason a prop like this ever
needs to be on the ballot. The legislature (or Board of Supervisors) already
has the ability to fund programs during the budgeting process. When you see
something like this, it means they found a way to fund a pet project using
language they believe voters will like. We’ll be stuck with that decision in
the next recession because this can only be changed with another popular vote.

### Vote to liberate funds from budget set-asides <small>\[<a id="taxation.liberate-set-asides" href="#taxation.liberate-set-asides">taxation.liberate-set-asides</a>\]</small>

I wish this category showed up more often, but it’s extremely rare. Any time a
budget set-aside is up for repeal, VOTE YES. Let the legislature control
budgeting!

### Vote to fund infrastructure <small>\[<a id="taxation.infrastructure" href="#taxation.infrastructure">taxation.infrastructure</a>\]</small>

Due to Prop 13, San Francisco’s (and California’s) infrastructure is
dramatically under-funded. We need to fix our roads, transit, bike lanes, rail
roads, sewer, electricity, etc, etc. Let’s pay for it!

## Representation <small>\[<a id="representation" href="#representation">representation</a>\]</small>

### Vote for groups that don’t have a strong lobby (youth, disabled, homeless, low-income people, the environment) <small>\[<a id="representation.no-lobby" href="#representation.no-lobby">representation.no-lobby</a>\]</small>

This should be self-explanatory.

These ballot props deserve a proper reading, but if you consider yourself a
democrat then you should probably go ahead and approve these measures.

### Vote against things which infringe upon rights of the people <small>\[<a id="representation.rights" href="#representation.rights">representation.rights</a>\]</small>

This rarely comes up, but it looks like: limits on speech, rolling back rights
(eg making gay marriage illegal again), limiting what people can consume or pay
for.

I find propositions like this fundamentally illiberal. We should default to
more liberty and less central control of our lives.

## Values <small>\[<a id="values" href="#values">values</a>\]</small>

### Vote for social policy change in ways that agree with our values <small>\[<a id="representation.rights" href="#values.social">values.social</a>\]</small>
For example: pro-LGBTQ+ rights.

For props in this category, I will endeavor to explain my values and why you
should adopt them.

## Good Government <small>\[<a id="good-government" href="#good-government">good-government</a>\]</small>

### Vote against things which increase needless or unhelpful bureaucracy
<small>\[[good-government.bureaucracy](#good-government.bureaucracy)\]</small>

Do you have any idea how many commissions and “oversight” bodies San Francisco
has? Neither do I — we have too many to count. Bias towards saying no to
passing the buck to a new bureaucratic agency.

### Vote against things which undermine good government
<small>\[[good-government.promote](#good-government.promote)\]</small>

The motivation behind this is self-explanatory, but the implementation is up to debate. What I consider good government may not be what you consider good government. When I use this justification, I will attempt to explain my reasoning well.
